---
speaker: Bas van den Heuvel
speaker_url: https://basvdheuvel.github.io/
speaker_title: PhD student at the Bernoulli Institute, University of Groningen
host: Stephanie Balzer
title: A Propositions-as-Sessions Interpretation of Bunched Implications
date: November 28th
time: 3:30pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract

The emergence of propositions-as-sessions, a Curry-Howard correspondence
between propositions of Linear Logic and session types for concurrent
processes, has settled the logical foundations of message-passing
concurrency. Central to this approach is the resource consumption paradigm
heralded by Linear Logic.

In this presentation I introduce a new point in the design space of session
type systems for message-passing concurrent programs. We identify O’Hearn
and Pym’s Logic of Bunched Implications (BI) as a fruitful basis for an
interpretation of the logic as a concurrent programming language. This
leads to a treatment of non-linear resources that is radically different
from existing approaches based on Linear Logic. We introduce a new
π-calculus with sessions, called πBI; its most salient feature is a
construct called spawn, which expresses new forms of sharing that are
induced by structural principles in BI. We illustrate the expressiveness of
πBI and lay out its fundamental theory: type preservation,
deadlock-freedom, and weak normalization results for well-typed processes;
an operationally sound and complete typed encoding of an affine λ-calculus;
and a non-interference result for access of resources.

#### Bio

Bas van den Heuvel is a PhD student at the University of Groningen in The
Netherlands. His research is on the foundations of correctness for
communicating software. The focus is on static correctness using session
types, but dynamic correctness using monitoring and model checking are also
explored. A major theme in this work is connections to logic, reaching
toward more canonical and less complex approaches.
