---
speaker: Kristin Yvonne Rozier
speaker_url: https://www.aere.iastate.edu/kyrozier/
speaker_title: Head of the Laboratory for Temporal Logic in Aerospace Engineering at Iowa State University
host: Marijn Heule
title: 'From Design Time To Run Time: Formal Methods for Ensuring the Safetyof Safety-Critical Aerospace Systems'
date: 2022-12-08
time: 3:00pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract

The COVID shutdowns of 2020 brought a new understanding of the need for
automation of safety-critical systems, from Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS)
and their automated control to robots taking over tasks recently done by
humans. As the demands for automation increase and the systems we design
grow ever-more complex to accommodate advancing technology, a question
arises: how do we know we are safe? This talk demonstrates how formal
methods are growing increasingly vital for the development of
safety-critical aerospace systems, and our ability to ensure safety and
security of new designs for the next era in air and space.

We highlight success stories of formally-verified automation, including
NASA's automated Air Traffic Management (ATM) system and its equivalent for
UAS (UTM). We contribute significant algorithmic advances to launch the
design-time verification technique of model checking to new heights. Also,
we demonstrate how formal specifications can be carried through to system
run time and used to take runtime verification out of this world... all the
way to the International Space Station (ISS). Our real-time, Realizable,
Responsive, Unobtrusive Unit (R2U2) fills the gap of flight-certifiable
reasoning that embeds on constrained safety-critical systems like UAS,
satellites, and NASA's humanoid robot Robonaut2 on the ISS. We introduce
current projects to further push the boundaries of both design-time and
runtime verification, asking the question, how do we proceed safely from
here?

#### Bio

NSF CAREER Award winner and recipient of the Inaugural
Initiative-Inspiration-Impact Award from Women in Aerospace, Kristin Yvonne
Rozier joined the faculty of the Aerospace Engineering and Computer Science
Departments in Fall, 2016. Previous to that, she spent three semesters at
the University of Cincinnati (2015-2016) and 14 years as a Research
Scientist at NASA, holding civil service positions at NASA Ames Research
Center (2008-2014) and NASA Langley Research Center (2001-2008).

Rozier earned her PhD Rice University and MS and BS degrees from the
College of William and Mary. During her tenure at NASA, she contributed
research to the Aeroacoustics, and Safety-Critial Avionics groups at NASA
Langley and to the Robust Software Engineering, and Discovery and Systems
Health groups in the Intelligent Systems Division at NASA Ames. She has
served on the NASA Formal Methods Symposium Steering Committee since
working to found that conference in 2008.
