---
speaker: Feras Saad
speaker_url: http://fsaad.mit.edu
speaker_title: Graduate Student, MIT
host: Jan Hoffman
title: Scalable Structure Learning, Inference, and Analysis
date: 2022-03-17
time: 10:00 am
room: NSH 4305
---

#### Abstract

Probabilistic programming supports probabilistic modeling, learning, and
inference by representing sophisticated probabilistic models as computer
programs in new programming languages. This talk presents efficient
probabilistic programming-based techniques that address two fundamental
challenges in scaling and automating structure learning and inference over
complex data.

First, I will describe scalable structure learning methods that make it
possible to automatically synthesize probabilistic programs in an online
setting by performing Bayesian inference over hierarchies of flexibly
structured symbolic program representations, for discovering models of time
series data, tabular data, and relational data. Second, I will present fast
compilers and symbolic analyses that compute exact answers to a broad range
of inference queries about these learned programs, which lets us extract
interpretable patterns and make accurate predictions in real time.

I will demonstrate how these techniques deliver state-of-the-art
performance in terms of runtime, accuracy, robustness, and programmability
by drawing on several examples from real-world applications, which include
adapting to extreme novelty in economic time series, online forecasting of
flu rates given sparse multivariate observations, discovering stochastic
motion models of zebrafish hunting, and verifying the fairness of machine
learning classifiers.

#### Bio

Feras Saad is a PhD candidate in Computer Science at MIT working at the
intersection of programming languages, probabilistic machine learning, and
computational statistics. His research is accompanied with a collection of
popular open-source probabilistic programming systems used by collaborators
at Intel, Takeda, Liberty Mutual, IBM, and the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation for practical applications of structure learning and
probabilistic inference. Feras' MEng thesis on probabilistic programming
and data science has been recognized with the 1st Place Computer Science
Thesis Award at MIT.

