--- 
speaker: Andrew Miner
speaker_url: https://faculty.sites.iastate.edu/asminer/
speaker_title: Associate Professor, Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University
host: Marijn Heule
title: 'RexBDDs: Reduction on Edge, Complement, and Swap Binary Decision Diagrams'
date: 2023/11/10
time: 2:00pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract
Binary decision diagrams (BDDs) are directed acyclic graphs used to represent
functions over boolean variables. They have enjoyed widespread success in a
number of domains, including hardware verification, model checking, and
combinatorial problems. This talk presents RexBDDs, a form of BDDs that
can exploit reduction opportunities beyond reduced ordered BDDs and
zero suppressed BDDs, and can incorporate both input complement (swap) and
output complement flags on edges. With appropriate restrictions,
RexBDDs are a canonical representation and can be manipulated using
appropriately-modified versions of BDD "Apply" algorithms.
We show, both theoretically and experimentally, that RexBDDs compare
favorably against other BDD variants.

#### Bio
Andrew Miner is an Associate Professor of Computer Science at Iowa State
University. Much of his research involves developing new variants of BDDs,
along with improved algorithms, for model checking and probabilistic model
checking of Petri nets and other high-level formalisms. He develops and
maintains the open-source software projects
SMART (Stochastic Model-checking Analyzer for Reliability and Timing)
and MEDDLY (Multi-terminal and Edge-valued Decision Diagram LibrarY).
