---
speaker: Emanuele D'Osualdo
speaker_url: https://www.emanueledosualdo.com/
speaker_title: Postdoctoral Researcher in Theoretical Computer Science at MPI-SWS Saarbrücken
host: Stephanie Balzer
title: Proving Hypersafety Compositionally
date: 2023-09-08
time: 10:00 AM
room: GHC 6115
---

#### Abstract

Hypersafety properties of arity N are properties that relate traces
of N programs. Classic examples include determinism, idempotence, and
associativity. A number of relational program logics have been introduced to
target this class of properties. Their aim is to construct simpler "relational"
proofs by capitalizing on structural similarities between the N
related programs.
In this talk, we elucidate a surprising blind spot in traditional
relational proof strategies: they do not compose well.
We solve the problem by proposing an unexplored, complementary
proof principle that establishes hyper-triples (i.e. hypersafety judgments) as
a unifying compositional building block for proofs, and we use it to develop a
Logic for Hyper-triple Composition (LHC), which supports forms of proof
compositionality that were not achievable in previous logics.

The talk will require no background in relational verification.

#### Bio

Emanuele D'Osualdo is a postdoc at MPI-SWS in Derek Dreyer's group.
Previously, he was a Marie Curie Fellow at Imperial College London. He
received his PhD from the University of Oxford under the supervision
of Luke Ong; his PhD thesis won the CPHC/BCS Distinguished
Dissertation award as best CS thesis in the UK.

Emanuele's research is in formal methods for the verification of
software, with a focus on concurrency and correctness properties
beyond safety (e.g. security and liveness properties). He has worked
both on automated techniques (based on static analysis, types and
infinite-state model checking) and, more recently, on compositional
logic-based methods (concurrent separation logic, linearizability and
relational logics).
