---
speaker: Jules Jacobs
speaker_url: https://julesjacobs.com/
speaker_title: PhD Student at Radboud University
host: Stephanie Balzer
title: Higher-Order Leak and Deadlock Free Locks
date: 2023-06-14
time: 3:00pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract

Well-typed Rust programs are guaranteed to be memory safe and data-race
free. Originally, Rust was also believed to be memory leak free, but there
are well-typed programs that leak memory when using Rust's shared memory
concurrency APIs. This talk is about a step toward getting stronger
guarantees by type checking: we present a linear type system for locks that
guarantees leak and deadlock freedom. These locks are flexible in two ways:
(1) they are first-class values that can be stored in data structures and
passed around to other threads, (2) there is no restriction on the order of
lock acquisition. Analogous to session types, the linear type system
instead restricts the `sharing topology' to be acyclic. As an extension, we
add lock orders to allow some well-behaved circular dependencies, at the
cost of some restrictions on lock acquisition order. We prove in Coq that
all well-typed programs are leak and deadlock free.

#### Bio

Jules Jacobs is a PhD student in the Software Science group at Radboud
University in the Netherlands, under the supervision of Robbert Krebbers
and Stephanie Balzer. He completed his undergraduate degree in mathematics
and physics at Leiden University. His research focuses on the development
of type systems and logics that prevent deadlocks and memory leaks in
software systems.
