---
speaker: Ron Minsky
speaker_url: https://blog.janestreet.com/author/yminsky/
speaker_title: Co-head of Technology at Jane Street
host: Jan Hoffmann
title: Making OCaml Safe for Performance Engineering
date: 2023-04-18
time: 3:00pm
room: NSH 3305
---

#### Abstract

Over the last couple of years, Jane Street has greatly increased its
investment in OCaml, and has started developing major extensions to the
OCaml's type system, with the primary goal of making OCaml a better
language for writing high-performance systems.

In this talk, I'll attempt to provide a developer's-eye view of these
changes.  We'll cover two major directions of innovation: first, the
addition of modal types to OCaml, which opens up a variety of ambitious
features, like memory-safe stack-allocation; type-level tracking of
effects, and data-race freedom guarantees for multicore code.  The second
is the addition of a kind system to OCaml, which will provide more control
over the representation of memory, in particular allowing for structured
data to be represented in a cache-and-prefetch-friendly tabular form.
Together, these features pull together some of the most important features
for writing high performance code in Rust, while maintaining the relative
simplicity of programming in OCaml.

In all of this, I'll focus less on the type theory, and more on how these
features are surfaced to users, the practical problems that they help us
solve, and the place in the design space of programming languages that this
leaves us in.

#### Bio

Yaron Minsky got his BA in Mathematics from Princeton and his PhD in
Computer Science from Cornell, where he studied distributed systems. He
joined Jane Street in 2003, where he started out developing quantitative
trading strategies, going on to found the firm's quantitative research
group. He introduced OCaml to the company and managed the transition to
using OCaml for all of its core infrastructure, turning Jane Street into
the world's largest industrial user of the language. In the meantime, he's
been involved in many different aspects of Jane Street's technology stack,
including trading and risk systems, machine learning infrastructure,
developer tools, and user-interface toolkits. Yaron has lectured, blogged
and written about programming for years, with articles published in
Communications of the ACM and the Journal of Functional Programming, and is
co-author of the book Real World OCaml.
