---
speaker: Ugo Dal Lago
speaker_url: https://udallago.github.io/
speaker_title: Professor of Computer Science at the University of Bologna
host: Jan Hoffmann
title: From Equivalences to Metrics, Effectfully
date: 2023-02-22
time: 3:00pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract

Program equivalence is one of the fundamental concepts in the theory of
programming languages. In defining the underlying relation, one always
strives for compositionality, so that the principle of substitution of
equals by equals holds and equational reasoning remains sound. Would it be
possible to make equational reasoning compatible with natural
generalizations of the notion of equivalence, and with notions of program
distance in particular? In this talk, we describe a series of situations in
which quantitative reasoning is desirable, together with some proposals for
notions of program distance in the style of logical relations and
applicative bisimilarity. In doing so, we will focus on higher-order
calculi exhibiting some form of computational effect, such as probabilistic
choice and cost. In this context, the need for quantitative reasoning is
even more urgent, but considerable technical difficulties tend to emerge.

#### Bio

Ugo Dal Lago is professor of computer science at the University of Bologna,
as well as being affiliated with INRIA Sophia Antipolis. His research
activity concerns the theory of programming languages and the interactions
between logic and computer science. More specifically, he is interested in
the quantitative aspects of program semantics, verification, and
transformation, with applications to complexity analysis, cryptography, and
approximate program transformations.
