---
speaker: Chaitanya Koparkar
speaker_url: https://dblp.org/pid/201/8034.html
speaker_title: PhD Student at Indiana University
host: Bob Harper
title: The Gibbon Compiler: Efficient data representation and program
correctness, pick two
date: 20203-01-30
time: 3:30pm
room: Zoom
---

#### Abstract

Gibbon is a compiler for a small (strict) subset of Haskell. It overturns a
basic assumption in programming language implementation---the assumption
that every program value of unknown size must be "boxed" into a pointer.
Gibbon explores an alternate approach where even irregular data takes a
dense, mostly pointer-free form in memory. It focuses on recursive sum
types and transforms functions on them to operate on dense representations.
This fits with how modern CPU architectures work, resulting in significant
performance improvements. Tree traversals in Gibbon are usually an order of
magnitude faster than GHC. Gibbon values can also be processed directly
from disk, much like GHC's Compact Normal Form or Cap 'n Proto in C++, but
are more compact and efficient to use. Finally, Gibbon also allows reading
and writing mostly pointer-free values in parallel, providing the benefits
of dense data formats and parallelism.



Gibbon's compilation strategy is based on a type-safe location calculus
that formalizes this notion of programming with dense pointer-free data.
Gibbon features location inference that automatically transforms programs
written in a high-level language to the location calculus for compilation.
Thus, users can get the performance benefits of efficient data
representations without having to write error-prone low-level code.



In this talk, we'll summarize the work on Gibbon thus far, and ongoing
development.

#### Bio

Chaitanya Koparkar is a Ph.D. candidate at Indiana University where he
studies programming languages, compilers, and parallel programming. His
research focuses on developing programming language theory and
implementation strategies that enable a compiler to improve the run time
performance of a program in an automatic and safe manner.
