---
speaker: Hazem Torfah
speaker_url: https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~hazem.torfah/
speaker_title: Assistant Professor, Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology
host: Marijn Heule
title: Synthesizing Pareto-Optimal Interpretations for Black-Box Models
date: 2023-05-18
time: 3:00pm
room: GHC 4405
---

#### Abstract

We present a new multi-objective optimization approach for
synthesizing interpretations that "explain" the behavior of black-box
machine learning models. Constructing human-understandable
interpretations for black-box models often requires balancing
conflicting objectives. A simple interpretation may be easier to
understand for humans while being less precise in its predictions
vis-a-vis a complex interpretation. Existing methods for synthesizing
interpretations use a single objective function and are often
optimized for a single class of interpretations. In contrast, we
provide a more general and multi-objective synthesis framework that
allows users to choose (1) the class of syntactic templates from which
an interpretation should be synthesized, and (2) quantitative measures
on both the correctness and explainability of an interpretation. For a
given black-box, our approach yields a set of Pareto-optimal
interpretations with respect to the correctness and explainability
measures. We show that the underlying multi-objective optimization
problem can be solved via a reduction to quantitative constraint
solving, such as weighted maximum satisfiability. To demonstrate the
benefits of our approach, we have applied it to synthesize
interpretations for black-box neural-network classifiers. Our
experiments show that there often exists a rich and varied set of
choices for interpretations that are missed by existing approaches.

#### Bio

Hazem Torfah is a postdoctoral researcher in the EECS Department at UC
Berkeley. He received his doctoral degree in Computer Science in
December 2019 from Saarland University, Germany. His research
interests are the formal specification, verification, and synthesis of
cyber-physical systems.  In his Ph.D., Hazem developed a quantitative
theory for reactive systems based on model counting. His doctoral
thesis was awarded with the Dr.-Edward-Martin Dissertation award. He
is one of the main developers of the RTLola monitoring framework,
which has been integrated into the ARTIS fleet of unmanned aerial
vehicles in close collaboration with the German Aerospace Center
(DLR). Hazem's current focus is the development of quantitative
methods for the explainability and runtime assurance of AI-based
autonomous systems.
