---
speaker: Georg Moser
speaker_url: https://scholar.google.at/citations?user=nT0BZ_AAAAAJ&hl=de
speaker_title: Professor for Computer Science, University of Innsbruck
host: Jan Hoffmann
title: Automated Expected Cost Analysis of Splaying et al.
date: 2023-06-08
time: 3:00pm
room: GHC 4405
---

#### Abstract

> In this talk, I present recent work on fully-automated
> (expected) amortised cost analysis of self-adjusting data structures,
> like splay trees or splay heaps, as well as probabilistic data
> structures like randomised splay trees or splay heaps and randomised
> meldable heaps. Prior to our work, these data structures have only
> (semi-)manually been analysed in the literature.
>
> Our analysis is stated as a type-and-effect system for a first-order
> functional programming language with support for sampling over discrete
> distributions, non-deterministic choice and a ticking operator. The
> latter allows for the specification of fine-grained cost models.
>
> With our prototype implementation, we have been able automatically infer
> bounds on the (expected) amortised cost, which could previously only be
> obtained by sophisticated pen-and-paper proofs. In particular, we verify
> that the amortised costs of randomised variants of self-adjusting data
> structures improve upon their non-randomised variants.
>
> This is joint work with Lorenz Leutgeb and Florian Zuleger.

#### Bio

> Georg Moser is a Full Professor of Theoretical Computer Science at the
> University of Innsbruck since February 2020. He studied Computer
> Science and Logic at the Vienna University of Technology and the
> University of Leeds, respectively. Prior to his appointment to full
> professor, he has been an associate professor at the University of
> Innsbruck, heading a reserach group on computation with bounded
> resources. His research interests centre around logic and program
> analysis. For the latter, a recent focus of his work is on
> probabilistic programming and Quantum computation. He has lead a
> number of national and international research consortia. He has acted
> as steering committee chair and member of international conference
> series and similar research consortia and continues to do so.
> Moreover, he has been chair of the IFIP Working Group 1.6. His
> expertise is frequently sought as a program committee member of most
> prominent conferences such as FSCD, LICS, etc. Further, he has
> frequently provided editorial services.
