---
speaker: Jesse Michel
speaker_url: https://web.mit.edu/jmmichel/www/
speaker_title: Graduate Student, MIT
host: Feras Saad
title: Distributions for Compositionally Differentiating Parametric Discontinuities
date: 2024/04/18
time: 3:00pm
room: NSH 3305
---

#### Abstract

Many computations in physical simulation, computer graphics, and
probabilistic inference require differentiating discontinuous processes
arising from contact, occlusion, or changes at a point in time.
Unfortunately, popular differentiable programming languages, such as
PyTorch and JAX, do not correctly handle discontinuities during
differentiation, leading to invalid results for programs with _parametric
discontinuities_---i.e., conditional statements containing at least one
real-valued parameter and variable of integration. This talk describes
Potto, a first-order programming language that computes provably sound
derivatives in the presence of parametric discontinuities. Potto is
formalized in terms of novel a denotational semantics for program
derivatives that is grounded in distribution theory, a generalization of
measure theory that computes sound derivatives in settings where naive
differentiation fails. As compared to the previous state-of-the-art
baseline system, Potto supports separate program compilation, leading to
88.1x--441.2x speed up in compile time and 2.5x--7.9x speed up in runtime
respectively, on two increasingly large image stylization benchmarks. We
further showcase Potto by implementing a prototype differentiable renderer
with separately compiled shaders.

#### Bio

Jesse Michel is a fourth year PhD student in the Programming Systems Group
at MIT advised by Michael Carbin. He is visiting CMU this semester to work
with Feras Saad on automatic differentiation of probabilistic programs. He
completed his undergraduate in pure math and computer science at MIT and
his Master's in Engineering at MIT on speeding up arbitrary-precision
arithmetic using automatic differentiation. He is the recipient of the
Ashar Aziz Presidential Fellowship.
