--- 
speaker: Wonyeol Lee
speaker_url: https://wonyeol.github.io/
speaker_title: Postdoctoral Associate, Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
host: Feras Saad
title: 'Bridging the Theory and Practice of Continuous Computations'
date: 2024/02/01
time: 3:00pm
room: NSH 3305
---

#### Abstract
Continuous computations, which involve continuous data and operations, play
a key role in many areas such as machine learning and scientific computing.
In theoretical studies of these computations, we usually assume that
certain mathematical objects (e.g., input functions) are well-behaved
(e.g., differentiable). In practice, however, these objects are often
ill-behaved (e.g., non-differentiable) partly because they are expressed in
terms of programs. This gap between theory and practice hinders rigorous
reasoning about these computations, and sometimes produces totally
unexpected results.

In this talk, I will present some of my work on studying and bridging this
gap, especially for two classes of continuous computations: automatic
differentiation and variational inference. For each of these computations,
I will first identify several gaps between the theory and practice of the
computation (e.g., differentiable vs. non-differentiable programs), some of
which have been overlooked before. I will then explain two types of new
results around these gaps: how these gaps can affect the correctness of the
computation, and how we can recover the correctness even under these gaps.


#### Bio
Wonyeol Lee is a postdoc at CMU, working with Feras Saad. He received
a PhD in Computer Science from Stanford, working under Alex Aiken. In
2017-2020, he was at KAIST for military service, working with Hongseok
Yang. His research aims to (i) deepen our theoretical understanding of
existing practical continuous computations, and (ii) design new practical
continuous computations that have theoretical guarantees.