---
speaker: Cameron Freer
speaker_url: https://cfreer.org/
speaker_title: Research Scientist, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
host: Feras Saad
title: Computability and Symmetry in Probabilistic Programming
date: 2024-09-20
time: 2:00pm
room: GHC 6501
---

#### Abstract

We consider the computable content of several key theorems in probability
theory, and discuss their implications for the design of probabilistic
programming languages.

A random variable is said to be exchangeable when its distribution does not
depend on the ordering of the underlying elements.  Sequences, arrays,
graphs, and other data structures satisfying this symmetry condition are
models for homogeneous data sets and serve as building blocks in Bayesian
nonparametric statistics. Representation theorems by de Finetti, Aldous,
Hoover, and Kallenberg show that exchangeability gives rise to conditional
independence. We establish both positive and negative computable versions
of these results, and explore the consequences for sequential and parallel
implementations of exchangeable objects in code.

Bayes’ theorem describes conditional probabilities, and is fundamental in
probabilistic inference. We show that not every computable joint
distribution admits a computable conditional distribution, and examine the
implications for automating Bayesian inference.

This talk is based on joint work with Nathanael Ackerman, Jeremy Avigad,
Daniel Roy, and Jason Rute.

#### Bio

Cameron Freer is a Research Scientist in the Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a
member of the MIT Probabilistic Computing Project. His research explores
interactions of randomness and computation, and focuses on the foundations
of probabilistic computing, efficient samplers and testing methods for
probabilistic inference, and the mathematics of random structures. Cameron
received his PhD in Mathematics from Harvard University advised by Gerald
Sacks, and has held positions at the University of Hawaii, Keio University,
and several industry research labs.
