---
speaker: Joël Ouaknine
speaker_url: https://people.mpi-sws.org/~joel/
speaker_title: Scientific Director
host: Frank Pfenning
title: The Skolem Landscape
date: 2024/05/20
time: 2:00pm
room: GHC 4303
---

#### Abstract
The Skolem Problem asks how to determine algorithmically whether a
given linear recurrence sequence (such as the Fibonacci numbers) has a
zero. It is a central question in dynamical systems and number theory,
and has many connections to other branches of mathematics and computer
science. Unfortunately, its decidability has been open for nearly a
century! In this talk, I will present a survey of what is known on the
Skolem Problem and related questions, including recent and ongoing
developments.

#### Bio
Joël Ouaknine is a Scientific Director at the Max Planck
Institute for Software Systems in Saarbrücken, Germany. His research
interests straddle theoretical computer science and mathematics, and
lie mainly at the intersection of dynamical systems and computation,
making use of tools from number theory, Diophantine geometry,
algebraic geometry, and mathematical logic. Joël studied mathematics
at McGill University, and received a PhD in Computer Science from
Oxford in 2001. He subsequently held postdoc positions at Tulane
University and Carnegie Mellon University, and became Full Professor
of Computer Science at Oxford in 2010. He received the Roger Needham
Award in 2010, an ERC grant in 2015, and was elected member of
Academia Europaea in 2020; the same year he also received the Arto
Salomaa Prize (jointly with James Worrell), for "outstanding
contributions to Theoretical Computer Science, in particular to the
theory of timed automata and to the analysis of dynamical systems". He
was elected Fellow of the ACM in 2021 for "contributions to
algorithmic analysis of dynamical systems".
