---
speaker: Adam Chlipala
speaker_url: http://adam.chlipala.net/
speaker_title: Professor of Computer Science, MIT
host: Jan Hoffmann
title: First-Principles Formal Verification of Cryptographic Systems
date: 2024/04/12
time: 11:00am
room: NSH 3002
---

#### Abstract
 In theory, it has been clear that complete computing stacks
(software and hardware) can be proved correct from logical first
principles, but in practice, it doesn't tend to happen very often.
I'll report on our experiences using the Coq theorem prover to
establish such theorems for nontrivial pieces of cryptographic
functionality.  A warm-up with immediate applicability is Fiat
Cryptography, a formally verified compiler for finite-field
arithmetic, which today is used by every major web browser for TLS,
and which is able to set new performance records with automatically
generated code for important arithmetic routines.  Fiat Cryptography
is one part of the larger case study that I'll talk about, which
involves a binary string of RISC-V machine code that runs on a
commercial microcontroller (without requiring any other software to be
loaded).  Its unified proof establishes that it drives the processor
to implement a cryptographic protocol that opens or closes a Lego
garage door, when an authorized remote party authenticates properly
over Ethernet/IP/UDP.  These experiences have motivated new ideas in
semantics and verification, and they've also helped shine light on
practical bottlenecks in use of proof assistants based on type theory.

#### Bio
Adam's background is in programming languages and formal methods.  He
is interested in developing simpler and more effective abstractions
for building correct, secure, and performant systems -- usually taking
advantage of machine-checked mathematical proofs somehow.  His work
applies ideas like object-capability systems, proof-carrying code,
transactions, type systems, and whole-program optimizing compilers for
high-level languages; with applications in computer architecture,
cryptography, databases, and operating systems, including novel
designs that span traditional layers.
