---
speaker: Ohad Kammar
speaker_url: https://denotational.co.uk/
speaker_title: Senior Research Fellow
host: Jan Hoffmann
title: Type-driven foundations for statistical modelling
date: 2024/03/19
time: 3:30pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract
The classical foundation for statistical modelling takes as primitive
the notion of an observable event, axiomatising their properties by
measurable spaces and functions. While measurable spaces support
concrete type structure well, one faces inherent no-go results when
dealing with more abstract spaces like: spaces of measurable functions
for modelling continuous-time processes; spaces of measurable
functionals for measurable statistics; and measurably-dependent
function spaces for conditional probabilities. In joint work with
Heunen, Staton, and Yang, we proposed quasi-Borel spaces. Here the
axiomatisation takes as primitive the notion of a random element, also
known as random variables in concrete cases. These spaces support
notions for both concrete and abstract spaces. Having arrived at this
collection of spaces in a fairly abstract manner, as a full
sub-category of concrete sheaves, I was pleasantly surprised to find
that some of their abstract type structure does support operations at
the heart of statistics, measure theory, and classical descriptive set theory.

In this talk, I will survey this line of work. I will cover the basic
definitions and ideas underlying quasi-Borel spaces, as well as some
abstract ones. I will then review how myself and others have used
these spaces as a semantic foundation for expressive probabilistic
modelling languages and their Monte Carlo Bayesian inference
implementations. I will conclude with more recent work developing
and applying the dependently typed structure of these spaces.

Copyright (c) Robert Harper.  All Rights Reserved.


#### Bio
Ohad Kammar is a Senior Research Fellow in the Laboratory for the
Foundations of Computer Science at the University of Edinburgh School
of Informatics. He is interested in programming language theory and
design, algebra, logic, and category theory.

Copyright (c) Robert Harper.  All Rights Reserved.
