---
speaker: Liron Cohen
speaker_url: https://www.lironcohenlab.com/
speaker_title: Senior Lecturer (Assistant Professor), Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University
host: Robert Harper
title: Realizability Meets Effects - Advancing Computational Foundations
date: 2025-04-18
time: 2:00pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract
The Curry-Howard correspondence and its semantic embodiment in the
form of realizability, establish a foundational connection between
logic, programming, and type systems. However, these fundamental
frameworks fall short of addressing modern computational paradigms
that rely on effects such as state, concurrency, and probabilistic
behavior. This talk explores effectful realizability, a new approach
that extends realizability to encompass a wide range of computational
effects. We will introduce (at least) two new algebraic structures:
Evidenced Frames, which provide an abstract structure for building
effectful realizability models, and Monadic Combinatory Algebras, a
monadic-based extension of traditional partial combinatory algebras.
We will see how these extensions not only have a critical impact on
the resulting theory, allowing novel computational interpretations of
key principles, but also offer a robust framework for verifying modern
computational systems.

#### Bio
Liron Cohen is an assistant professor of Computer Science at
Ben-Gurion University who uses formal methods to develop frameworks
that support formal reasoning about programs and proofs, aiming to
improve reliable software and formalized mathematics. Her research
focuses on expanding notions of computation and the logical principles
governing the properties of systems, as well as developing formal
techniques that facilitate program verification and mechanized
mathematics. She was a Fulbright postdoctoral researcher at Cornell
University, and she received her PhD and MSc from Tel Aviv University.
