---
speaker: Yaron Minsky
speaker_url: https://github.com/yminsky
speaker_title: Head of Technology at Jane Street
host: Seth Goldstein
title: The saga of runtime 5
date: 2025-04-22
time: 2:00pm
room: GHC 8102
---

#### Abstract
In December 2022, after nearly a decade of development, OCaml 5.0.0
was released with OCaml’s first multi-core capable runtime. This was
an exciting milestone, finally making it possible to write
shared-memory parallel programs in OCaml. The new runtime was designed
to be easy to adopt: it didn’t disturb OCaml’s FFI, and performance
was meant to be only a couple of percentage points slower in
single-core mode.

Despite those promising beginnings, switching to runtime-5 was harder
than we expected. Indeed, We’ve only managed to switch to it this
year, after months and months of research and engineering effort to
make it work for our use-cases.

This talk will give an overview of the problems we ran into, and why
switching to runtime-5 was so much harder than we expected. We’ll also
discuss what we learned from the process, both about how to stage a
complex change like this, as well as some new things we learned about
how to design a GC, and the improvements we landed in OCaml as part of
that work.

#### Bio
Yaron Minsky got his BA in Mathematics from Princeton and his PhD in
Computer Science from Cornell focusing on distributed systems. He
joined Jane Street in 2003, where he founded the firm's quantitative
research group.

He introduced OCaml, a statically typed functional programming
language, to the company and managed the transition to using OCaml for
all of its core infrastructure, turning Jane Street into the world's
largest industrial user of the language.  He's been involved in many
different aspects of Jane Street's technology stack, including machine
learning infrastructure, distributed systems design, incremental
programming systems, hardware synthesis,  trading and risk systems,
developer tools, and user-interface toolkits.
