---
speaker: Brian G. Milnes
speaker_url: https://github.com/briangmilnes/
speaker_title: Developer
host: Guy Blelloch
title: 'APAS-VERUS: AI Paired Proof Engineering Techniques and Experience'
date: 2026-05-13
time: 2:00pm
room: GHC 6501
---

#### Abstract

This talk focuses on my experiences using LLM AIs to generate Rust code for
Acar and Blelloch's 'Algorithms Parallel and Sequential' textbook. I
implemented all of its 121 algorithm variants, 81 of which are parallel,
and then verified them in the Verus formal verification system.

This work puts to rest the question of: can current AI LLMS be used to
prove practical Industrial-grade, performant algorithms.

I'll discuss my experiences, the time, the costs, and the software
engineering discipline developed using programmatic techniques to drive
down the agentic coding and proof costs. I'll review Rust's strengths and
weaknesses, discuss Verus's strengths and weaknesses and review AI agents
and their interfaces.

From this work I am able to provide three metrics, which I call the CPR$:

- C, a reasonable costs per lines estimate of code in agentic programming a
  textbook,

- P, and a reasonable costs per lines of proof while proving that code and
  learning Verus.

The bottleneck in agentic programming and proving is now the time to review
the code and proofs. I derive an exact measure, R, of how proven code
reduces the cost of programmer review.

#### Bio

Brian Milnes has done two years of industrial AI programming languages
development, followed by seven years of AI research at Carnegie Mellon
School of Computer Science (SOAR). Then two years of programming research
in programming languages focusing on their use in systems programming and
networking (Fox Project).

Milnes was then drafted into the Internet boom and directed groups working
in systems, performance, operations and architecture for Lycos, Amazon and
Zillow.

M.Sc. Computer Science, University of Washington

B.Sc. Mathematics (Computer Science), Carnegie Mellon University

